What if you could be given a snapshot of your past
and understand in an instant, your modus operandi?
In his book Genius Mind: Activating Your Brilliance,
Paul Sheele assists us to take this single frame images
from our past,
and use them to move beyond our mind's filters,
and connect with our own genius.
In this interview, he is particularly passionate
about keeping the innate genius of our children alive.
(peaceful music)
I had the privilage of sitting in on your presentation
on the subject of expanding our use of genius,
which was just fascinating,
and in addition to that you had some really wonderful,
simple, playful exercises,
which we're going to roll into this.
Normally we don't do that,
but first of all, let's talk about your,
the subject of the transformational power
of single images,
because this is something that,
it's a concept I think, it's new to most of us.
It's a remarkable concept when you realize
that for many years we've all been focused on the idea
of creating a vision of what we want in the future.
This idea of creative visualization has been taught
for decades now.
The concept that I'm bringing into the mass conciousness
is the work of a Dr. Ahsen,
who was originally from Cashmere,
came to United States in the early 60's,
and he's been working on this idea of eidetics
since the 1950's.
The eidetic is the image or the idea
that's coming into form,
it's an ancient Greek term.
Our word for idea was the Greek term iden,
and the ides were the messengers of the gods,
these messages of the gods is what we're here to receive.
In the Aboriginal cultures they talk about the dreaming.
That there is a reality that exists,
that has a life, it's fixed in the world already,
and mankind is attracted to those areas where
the dreaming is calling them to it,
so for example, in Australia,
somebody said, wow, look at where that beautiful city is,
that people have built here,
and the Aborigine, Aboriginal Chiefs they say,
"Yeah, the dreaming has been in that place forever.
"Through all of the millennium."
And the men, the white men, think
that what they've done is they've built this great thing,
they've only just responded to the dream
that's called them to build there.
And so, an appreciation of an idea
that is already pre-existant within us,
or think of it this way,
that the presence and power
of a higher consciousness is trying to express itself
through our lives.
If you think about the sun and the rays
coming out of the sun,
we are emanations of that one source.
We're not here trying to have a spiritual experience,
we're not the rays of the sun
trying to get back to the sun,
we are the emanation, we are the expression,
and so if we would go within ourselves,
and be still or be quiet,
and allow that idea to come forward,
that's the eidetic,
and there are certain eidetics, certain images,
that are actually very fixed within us,
and if we would contact them and then watch
where the eidetic takes us,
in other words, be open to the idea,
and then watch the idea and follow it
instead of forcing the world
to be what we want it to be,
allow it to unfold and allow it to express.
And that is what the Western world does,
we take our analytical mind
and we try to conjure or construct an outcome.
Or whatever that reality may be.
Right and if we see that we're really,
we're really fulfilling a higher purpose,
then our lives become more meaningful as well.
See, the idea that's happening today,
and this is brought about in a
program called the Pachamama Alliance.
The Achuar Indians in Central America, Ecuador,
are the native custodians of the natural world.
They're the custodians of the rain forest.
And it seems that Mother Earth
communicates through the rain forest,
then the rain forest communicates to the Achuar
in the dream world.
And the Achuar are a dream culture,
and they went into the dream world
to contact the modern world.
Not to become inculturated into the modern world,
but to help the modern world awaken.
In their cosmology,
they believe we are living in 500 year cycles.
There's 12, 500 year cycles.
The last 500 year cycle just ended.
And it was predicted millennia ago
to be a time of discovery and destruction.
And it started in 1492.
Interesting.
Now, we've just passed out of that 500 year cycle,
and this next 500 year cycle
is the time in which the condor and the eagle
will fly together in the same sky.
Now, in this, in this mythology of theirs,
the eagle is a people who live in their minds.
They're a people who have high technology
but they're stuck in a dream
and as a result of their dream,
they're destroying the natural world.
The condor are the people who are the natural custodians
of the world,
and what they need to do is
they need to help awaken the dreamer
and change the dream.
And so the Pachamama Alliance,
Lynne Twist, who was the director of the Hunger Project
for many years,
wrote a book called the Soul of Money.
She was contacted in the dream world,
found the Achuar Indians, traveled to the rain forest,
and now they've created this alliance
to help do this, to help awaken humanity.
You know, if you think about the eagle,
well what people could be high technology people,
with eagle in their national symbols alright?
Hello?
The Germans, the US, you know.
The US, that's exactly what I was thinking.
And so the idea is,
that we're, as a culture,
we're trapped in a nightmare believing that
the natural world is going to fulfill an emptiness
that's within us.
And so what we do is,
we rape and destroy the natural world
to try to consume it,
to try to fill that emptiness,
but what happens?
We get to the end and we realize
that the emptiness is still there.
In my work, when I was 19 years old,
I was actually trained as a professional hypnotist.
And one of the things that I recognize
is that my job wasn't to place people into trances,
because I realize so many people already are in trances,
but they're self limiting and they're self defeating.
What I realized I had to do
was awaken people from their self limiting trances
to awaken them to realize the full magnificence
of who they are.
And if you go to the tradition of
the Himalayan yoga meditations,
you realize that their philosophy is,
there's only one suffering.
And humanity, the only suffering that humanity has,
is a result of ignorance.
It's ignorance of their divine nature.
So you see, when we awaken to who we are,
as spiritual beings here to have this human experience,
we recognize that we're connected to the natural world,
we can't destroy the natural world,
in order to fulfill an emptiness we feel,
we have to be able to live in harmony and balance with that.
And so this concept of awakening from the trance,
awakening from the nightmare,
awakening the dreamer and changing the dream,
if we think about what is the real dream,
the dream is our divine nature attempting to express itself
through our lives.
And the eidetic, that true eidetic image,
that pure idea from the realm of pure imagination
from which we sprung,
if we would make contact with that
and then follow it,
we would have fulfillment in our lives.
What happened is as we were born into the world,
we began interacting with the history of the world.
The history of our parents,
the history of our culture and our religion,
and we have to try to find our way through it,
and it's separated our mind from our experience,
our body and mind became separated,
and that, that separation is what we call
psychosematic illness.
And if we look at what we're understanding about
complementary and alternative medicine,
we recognize that the source
of virtually 100% of all illness,
is in the mind.
That's right.
Etiology, the causation, is at the mind first.
So if we could heal ourselves,
if we could restore the psyche and the soma,
then what we have is this opportunity to live
at our fullness.
And so story is of working with Dr. Ahsen,
the stories of paralysis disappearing,
muscular sclerosis disappearing,
all kinds of mental illnesses completely evaporating,
it's a result of the work of this,
concept of the eidetic and recontacting the realm
of pure imagination,
which is really where we come from.
So does that mean deconstructing
what we have, essentially, learned
since birth?
I like the way you say that, deconstructing.
If we could understand the construction
of our thoughts, of our memories,
and realize that what we're doing constantly,
is we're reconstructing an original experience.
And if our original experience
was a distortion, a deletion, a generalization
of what was really going on,
then what we have is a problem inside of us.
That idea that we keep reconstructing
is not an idea of our wholeness,
it's an idea of our dysfunction, of our woundedness,
of our brokenness,
so think about this.
The human mind, when it remembers anything,
we can guide our reviewers to have this experience,
this is really kind of fun.
Okay, now hold on, sit in a nice,
quiet position, and get ready for a little exercise, too.
This is to help understand
that all memory is reconstructing
of an original construction.
Now, again, the point of this is,
the human mind naturally deletes, distorts,
and generalizes,
because we wanna understand the world,
and we wanna understand it quickly,
but as a result of that speed,
we actually lose some of the clarity
and the objectivity of the truth of what was really
there for us at the time.
We have a meaning and then we try to
create our understanding of that, you see.
I think most people can relate to that,
when they start looking back on their lives,
it's a massive distortion.
Exactly, most of what we recall
is highly distorted, so,
what I'd like to share with everybody is
this idea of how the mind remembers something.
Because memory happens,
the remembering of something happens 400
to 2,000 times faster than we can consciously
see it happening,
we don't realize that what's happening is reconstruction.
So I'm gonna give you an exercise.
Okay.
When I say now, you have to do this,
as fast as you can.
Are you speaking to me or everybody else
or all of us?
Everybody that's listening.
But I'm gonna force you to do it.
(laughing)
Alright.
Okay, so as fast as you can,
and everybody does it at the same time,
if there's somebody sitting next to you,
you can do it with them,
you know, talk as fast as you can
and as loud as you can,
just try to do the exercise as quickly as possible.
Okay, we're all together on this one.
Okay, so first part, it's a three part exercise,
first part is say the months of the year in order now.
January, February, March, April,
May, June, July, August,
September, October, November, December.
Bingo.
Okay.
We know that my mind has that construct, okay.
So that's in there, that's how we remember it.
It comes very quickly.
You don't really see the mind remembering it.
It just happens.
So now, what you're going to do,
the second part of the exercise,
months of the year, reverse order,
starting with July, now.
July, June, May, April,
March, February, January, December,
November, October, September,
August, and I think we're there.
Excellent.
So, you know, I could see your eyeballs move.
Having to really try to track
that information.
Exactly, what you did, your eyes went up to the left
and if you study neurolinguistic programming,
what that says is, you're trying to remember
the visual picture,
and that's exactly right.
You have the calendar of the year
there in front of you and you're trying to see it
and you're trying, okay, now (stammering),
so this is reverse order, July--
It's not natural, right.
Yeah, so you're actually starting to see your mind
reconstruct something.
Right.
And that's actually what's happening all the time,
now we're gonna do the third part
of the exercise.
Okay.
Now you're really gonna get to see your mind
reconstructing (laughing).
Okay, months of the year,
alphabetical order, now.
April, August, December,
February.
February, March, April, May (laughing),
okay, I know I can do this,
M, m, m, m, m, is there anything before March?
March --
Well, there are a few other J's.
Oh, J's.
Oh there are January, July, and June.
Yeah, right?
Excellent.
And then there's March.
Okay, well we'll stop you there.
(laughing)
You're torturing me.
That's hard.
It's hard, but you see what's happening,
is you've got alphabeticity, you know,
what is the alphabetical order,
so there's A, there's B, there's C,
and there's D.
Right.
And then there's the months of the year,
now you're trying to build that,
well that's exactly what the mind does
when it tries to remember anything.
Interesting.
It takes these bits of information,
and according to research, it's not just
from within the brain,
it's non-local and it converges in the brain
in a certain area.
They actually call it, researchers call this
a convergence zone,
and we have different convergence zones
for episodic memories, you know,
episodes that have occurred in your life
or semantic memories,
you know, words and thoughts and ideas
and things like that.
So, the point of all this,
is when you're living your life,
today you're referencing your history,
you're reconstructing things,
and if your original construction
was a poor one,
then what you get later on is a poor reconstruction.
Just as an aside, if anybody says I got a lousy memory,
stop it, because everybody has less than a perfect memory,
memory isn't a perfect thing,
but if there's a gap in trying to remember something,
you can be sure that that gap is the result of
a poor construction, original construction,
so the attempt to reconstruct it isn't coming together.
What you need to do is what we call
intelligent gap management.
Manage the gap.
Just don't claim you're a lousy,
you know, you've got a lousy memory,
because that affirmation then works,
you won't try.
Right.
Oh I've got a lousy memory,
I'll never remember that.
And you don't even bother.
And you check out, right.
You check out completely.
So that's an aside, just a side bar,
and the point that I'm making about this
is there's certain images within us,
that are stored in our memory
and we'll go through a couple of these
and it's just to give people
an experience of this
and those memories are actually fixed.
And as a result of those fixed memories
if they're significant distortions and they interrupt,
the psyche and the soma,
the mind and the body,
then what we can do is
we can actually go back and
reconstruct or play a negative memory
and a positive memory next to each other.
And by doing this over and over again,
and then reconstructing over and over again
a positive memory,
we actually override the negative memory.
Negative memory never really goes away.
But by sorting for more images of greater
wholeism, greater fulfillment,
greater capacity, you begin to gain
more access to the true resources that are within you.
Remember I told you that
I originally grew up in the field of hypnosis,
I was 19 years old, trained as a professional hypnotist,
well that gave me a window
into people's minds that was an amazing opportunity
as a young man,
and then studying neurolinguistic programming,
I was one of the first few ever certified and credentialed
as a master practitioner,
there are only 70 of us in the world
when we are certified,
and so I'm certifiable now,
so the idea is that this gave me an opportunity
to see how the human mind is actually causing
so much of the malaise that people live.
So as a human development professional,
what I was always working with,
is to help people contact the true resources within them.
But more importantly, I see that
what we need to do is awaken from
the trances that we've been living in.
Recognize the magnificence of who we are
and then start living from that.
Well, when you get right down to it,
that magnificence is attempting to be
communicated to us.
And what we need to do is
we need to go inside,
be quiet enough to see where our mind
is trying to lead us.
Emerson said find your soul and poke it with a stick
and see which way it moves and then follow it.
Interesting, that's nicely put.
Yeah, and really I think that's what the science
of eidetics really gives us the opportunity
to create.
But instead, what we tend to do
is pull out the laundry list or the wish list,
of how we want to construct our lives
and if we have this meditation time available to us,
a lot of people spend a lot of that time
basically wishing, hoping, thinking,
and trying to create or construct a new reality
or better reality for themselves.
Rather than, what you say,
standing back and allowing the knowledge,
the truth, the direction to surface.
Right, and I also believe
that it doesn't have to be an either or.
So, for example, think of it this way,
I have an idea of the life I would choose to live.
A life of fulfillment, of success, of health,
of happiness, of spiritual growth,
so if I think of those four areas
of my life, success, health,
relationships, and spiritual growth,
and I think well, what is the life
that I would choose to live?
If it's three years from now,
five years, seven years from now,
what would my life experience be
what I would choose?
If I'm quiet enough,
then the thoughts and ideas that come to me
occur to me because that's what is
attempting to express in my life.
So instead of forcing my mind
to create a specific end result,
particular year and make and model of a car
and leather interior and all that,
say that what I am choosing to create
is the ideal transportation for me.
And then be open, give that to my mind,
and then be quiet,
and allow that intuitive sense,
that realm of pure imagination,
to then come up and say and Paul,
here's how it can occur,
try this, make this phone call,
talk to that person,
look into this particular type of vehicle,
consider no vehicle at all.
Try riding your bike instead,
you need the exercise anyway,
and so it's the idea, instead of driving,
driving, driving, try pushing to get from the universe
what I think I ought to have,
be open, say what the ideal is I would choose to live,
and then be open and let that intuitive side
to express.
To me, that's where that higher intelligence
has the opportunity to guide.
In other words, my job is to come up with what,
let the universe come up with the how,
and in that coming up with the how,
it's going to show me something greater.
It's going to show me pathways that I might not
have considered in my conscious, rational mind.
Absolutely.
But this requires trust
and patience and certainly many,
many of us watching this,
are in a world where goals and time
have been paramount,
so you're now removing those factors
to an extent and how do you teach a person,
or how do you encourage a person
to know that it's okay to relax,
to trust, to be patient with the outcomes?
One of the great ways that I've heard
through the years,
which I've always added in any visualization,
or any goal establishment that I would have,
is I'd always add this or something even better.
That's a good one.
So I'm open to allowing something greater to emerge
that I may not be able to see right now.
Another thing is to consider,
Ellen Langers work on mindfulness.
She says one of the worst things
that we can do for our minds
is to have an outcome.
Is to specify an end result that we must get to.
And this speaks to something about education as well,
if we can talk about that.
Oh, I can't wait to go there.
James Ogilvy wrote a book called
Living Without A Goal.
It's an intriguing idea where so many
self-improvement experts are saying
set a goal, set a goal, set an outcome--
Well, the movie The Secret
has been tearing through,
it's on the, it's at the check out stand
of all the big book sellers.
Yeah, and it's a brilliant idea of,
you know, we really need to ask for what it is
that we want,
and it's an important concept in The Secret,
and it says ask, receive, believe, you know,
the idea of be really open to receiving
and believe that the universe has the opportunity
it has the capacity to bring us to any of that,
when we are willing to not establish the form
in which it arrives,
then we're open to something greater
that can manifest itself,
but when we get our hands around the throat
of the universe and says now,
bring me exactly what I want or else,
you know, then we're not living in harmony
with our own part, the fullness of who we are,
we're saying I have a lack, I have a need,
now if I put that into the universe,
the universe says yes to that.
So here's the way I've heard it,
is if you want to change the type of home you live in,
somebody asks you, well, what kind of home do you want?
You say, you describe the home you're living in today.
And they say, well, wait, that's the home
you're now living in.
He says yeah, that's what I want.
Now I'm also choosing to create something else,
and here's what I'm going to choose to create.
But I always want what I have,
that way there's a sense--
Mmm, now that's an important ingredient.
You see, because think energetically,
here we are at our current level,
and if I say I want something,
I'm jumping into an energetic hole,
and saying I'm in a place of lack,
or limitation,
now I gotta crawl out of the hole
to get to here to now create my life.
Well, if I say I want what I have
and appreciate it as my magnificent creation,
I appreciate my illness,
I appreciate my spouse that I'm arguing with,
I appreciate my kids that I can't get along with,
and instead of focusing on what I don't like,
I really focus on what I really love,
by the way, I love my family.
That was for anybody else that doesn't love their spouse
or kids, you know,
but it's always about appreciating.
And the word appreciate is important, too,
because in a certain way,
when you think about our income as appreciating in value,
it's actually an increase.
So what we appreciate increases.
Yes, and that's where the whole gratitude--
Gratitude is so important,
that comes through in The Secret, I think,
in a powerful way.
Yes.
Many people watch The Secret,
they immediately say, well, its unrealistic,
and it's all about money,
it's really not.
Rhonda Burns, Rhonda Burn came to
the Transformational Leadership Council
to film most of the people that are part of it.
I was actually filmed for The Secret as well,
I didn't make the final cut.
Oh darn.
You would have been so fabulous, too.
You're very kind, but the idea is that,
the thing that people are criticizing about it,
is understandable because something
which has been on the periphery
and kind of off the radar of the mass consciousness,
those of us who are into new thought
and into the idea of self development,
understood these principles,
well suddenly now, it's in the public eye,
it's in the spotlight.
And you know, here's all of this amazing attentions.
What are people gonna focus on?
The things that's wrong with The Secret,
you know they're going to end up criticizing
rather than appreciating the, you know,
the purity of the intention.
We have a critical culture.
Yes.
And the beauty of it,
one of the things that Jack Hanfield said
when he and I were talking about The Secret,
he said probably the reason that
it has been so successful,
is Rhonda had such a pure intention.
She wanted this information to get into the hands
of humanity 'cause she knew it would make a difference.
And you know, the last--
And she's done it.
She really has, in the last six letters
of attraction are action.
And the idea is that, yeah, we understand
there's probably not enough focus
on what actions we need to take,
but it's okay, you know,
that's, we've raised the level
of conversation now.
So that's the good news.
The seeds have been planted.
That's right.
Well, there's--
We're going to talk about--
I wanna talk about education.
Education and also the eidetics.
The eidetics, yes.
So, would you like,
let's talk about, do you mind talking about
the education first?
Because this is really where it's happening
or not happening.
The whole notion of taking the magic
and the mystical and the creativity
away from our children in the educational system.
In the foreword of Maria Montessori's book,
Dr. Buckminister Fuller,
great inventor and thinker,
wrote the foreword,
and he said out of 10,000 children
that are born in the world,
9,999 of them will have been systematically
de-geniused by the time they get to the fifth grade,
by well intentioned, well meaning adults.
Now here's an interesting side bar to that,
my kids, from the very get go,
were all identified for the Gifted Pullout Program
within our schools.
We always had our kids in the public school system.
And there are two and then five years
separating our three boys.
Each one of them, when they were getting ready
to go into the fifth grade,
each one of them came to me
and said, "Dad, I don't wanna go into
"the Wings program this year."
Which was their gifted program.
And I said, "Oh, sweetheart, you know,
"there aren't many things that I'm gonna insist on,
"in your educational career, but I really am
"going to ask you to please reconsider
"and do this.
"You are so bright, you have such a brilliant thinking mind,
"you need the extra challenge that will be here.
"If you go into the regular classroom,
"you'll get dumbed down like everybody else does.
"Now let me ask you, is the reason that you don't
"wanna go into the Wing's program,
"because none of your friends wanna be there?"
Yeah, none of my friends wanna be in there,
none of it.
I said of course, 'cause none of them wanna do the work.
But you love the work, don't you?
Yeah, I do.
(laughing)
So stay with it.
They all stayed with it and they were all glad
that they did.
Well, here's this idea.
Why?
Even though my wife and I had the commitment
that our main job as parents is to prevent them
from getting degeniused,
why is it that naturally,
they would reach that place
where they were getting ready to check out.
I mean, really, most of us by the second grade
look at what's going on and say,
oh no, it's not gonna get any better than this.
My youngest son saw his two older brothers going to school
and he was three and a half years old,
and he said, "I'm going to go to school this year."
I said, "Scotty, it's a little early.
"School doesn't start for a few--"
No, I'm going to go to school this year.
So my wife scrambled around to get a preschool program
he could go to.
Got him all lined up, got him all set,
he came back from his first day of school,
I said, "Scotty, how did you like it, how was it?"
He said, "They made me sit down."
(laughing)
Big draw back to a three and a half year old.
It's like, sit down, be quiet,
pay attention, I'm gonna put something meaningless
on the board and you're gonna get tested.
It's oh my gosh, so you know,
the idea is that we have well intentioned adults
that are trying to enculturate the kids,
but what are they enculturating into?
It's oppression military model,
designed to take an Agrarian culture
and make them good fighters in a war.
That model became adopted in the English
and in the United States as the ideal model
to help take an Agrarian culture,
and bring them into an industrial age
where people need to be good factory workers.
Perfect, so the Stanford Binet Test,
the IQ measure, was originally designed
to decide who was worthy of reproduction in our society.
Truly, I didn't know that.
Those who were not going to be intelligent enough
they were going to be sterilized,
and not allowed to reproduce.
Yeah.
Where is this hidden piece of information
or is it hiding in plain sight?
I never heard that.
Yeah, if you go into the original history,
there was a whole group that were really supporting
this idea of measurement.
Now, those sorts of things got buried,
and we ended up using the intelligence quotion,
as a way to identify intelligence.
But what it really does,
is it excludes and it marginalizes.
Absolutely.
And so what we've got is a culture that's designed
to keep the culture in place,
and there is this exclusion and marginalization
separation, according to ability, capacity,
sometimes race, at least it was for many generations
in our culture.
And so what we ended up doing,
is well, oh, you're the A student,
well you can go on.
Well, innovations in education are saying no.
The student has a willingness
regardless of their performance
up until now.
They have a right to be in this program.
Should no longer exclude and marginalize.
Just like we're, we don't see everyday racism.
We don't see it in our culture and our jokes
and when, you know, we saw somebody
in the media losing his job as a result of
a racist comment, it started awakening people
to the recognition that we have this bias
that we don't ever question.
We don't question the bias of our educational systems.
And so our educators are being trained
in a model that they were educated in.
And as a result, it's like Carly Yung said,
how can you know the dragon that swallowed you?
You're in it.
If this is how we learned then we're going to reproduce
that as our default position.
So when there is a big initiative here in this country to
leave no child behind--
I was just going to ask you.
This initiative--
What a disaster.
It's an initiative to test kids.
Now think about this.
I'm sure you always loved the opportunity to be tested
when you were in school, right?
It's like, oh good, I can't wait.
It was my favorite thing.
Forget that art class and music, test me.
Let's get tested, ooh, a math test.
Oh yay.
No, I mean, the thing that created more stress
in you as a child was getting tested, why?
Because you're gonna be evaluated,
you're gonna find out what you didn't know,
and you're probably gonna be punished
if you didn't do it well.
Right.
Now stress has an effect at every level
of our cognitive systems.
On our attention, our perception,
our thinking, our decision making,
and our memory.
In fact, there are some kids
that don't test well.
I'll give you an example of a man
who was in the World Health Organization,
medical doctor, epidemiologist,
he had six graduate degrees, four post doctoral degrees,
brilliant man, he failed every class he went to
in high school and by sophomore year
he was such a behavior problem,
he was either gonna get kicked out,
or,
he was going to leave
and never come back.
And one of the counselors said,
"Why don't you go to college?"
He looked at him and said, "Are you insane?
"How can I go to college, I can't,
I can't pass a test here."
He said well go to college,
'cause some people just, they don't do well with high school
don't worry about it.
Go to college but tell them that
the only way that you can be tested
is orally.
Skyrocketed.
At every grade level that he went to
in every class, he was at the top of his class,
he graduated number one in his class
in every post doctorate degree
that he was in.
Now here's this whole idea,
now here we've got this initiative,
the way we're gonna improve education
is by testing everyone.
Now that stresses the administration,
they pass that stress to the teachers,
the teachers now insist on teaching to the test,
so forget about social studies,
we don't have time for it,
art, are you kidding?
Even though art improves math performance,
we're gonna drop art and music out.
Even though physical education
improves performance and memory,
we're gonna drop it because we don't have time,
we gotta focus on doing well on the test.
Insane.
Absolutely insane.
It is insane.
Well, you see, but we don't see the insanity
because of course, if we're going to improve education
we gotta know how we're doing
and then find the bad areas
and put our emphasis on overcoming the deficits within it.
You see, if we always think in that way
we're always gonna try to reproduce,
we're always gonna try to solve the problem,
at the level of thinking that put the problem
there to begin with.
And you see, when we talk about a paradigm shift,
got a problem, we got a solution to it,
the problem is kids aren't doing well,
well let's test them,
that testing creates more problems.
And so we've got the solution, problem,
solution, problem, this back and forth thing,
well, sure, but it's all within a paradigm that says
this is what education is,
let's go to a different place.
Let's solve the way we're solving the problem.
Think of it this way.
You ever heard about being graded on a bell curve?
So 20% are gonna pass whether they do anything or not,
they're gonna be fine,
60% in the middle,
20% are gonna fail no matter what you do for them.
Well, a bell curve actually represents
a random distribution of events.
That's what it is, it's a,
that's what a bell curve is,
it's a random distribution of events.
Well, if we grade on a bell curve,
what we're saying is,
education is a random event.
In a way it is,
if I have one teacher with one teaching style
and 30 students with 30 learning styles,
what am I gonna get?
Random.
A bell curve of random distribution event.
20 of them are gonna do great
'cause they learn just like the teacher teaches.
Right.
You see?
And then 20% are gonna fail no matter what
and the teacher's going to point at you
and say, "You're learning disabled."
They're not gonna see the three fingers
pointing back at them and say I'm teaching disabled.
Because we don't question the teaching model,
everybody else does well,
I had to go through it, you have to go through it,
everybody's gotta go through this.
We never question that the academic hierarchy
is in position to keep creativity
in the academic hierarchy limited.
You see, and we're gonna exclude anything that doesn't
really fulfill our model of what teaching and learning is.
And then, immediately, what's removed
from the equation is,
once the stress increases,
you have removed the joy of learning and of teaching.
Beautifully put, beautifully put.
The degeniusing is really a shock to the system.
Because if we're all naturally genius level thinkers
and potential and then suddenly we go into failure,
then we start framing everything as I am a failure,
not that I have failed to learn this,
I wonder how I might learn it in some other way,
I think I am a failure.
Well, that's the devastation and you know,
I've got examples of this,
because I teach teachers all over the world,
to teach using a more holistic brain based accelerative,
teaching and learning that engages the whole person,
engages the whole mind,
engages the conscious and the non-conscious capacities
these brilliant hidden resources,
that are within each individual,
so by teaching and learning in these other ways,
we're actually able to recover so many of the kids
that would normally have fallen off
the conveyor belt that education is running.
And when you're talking about,
I don't know if this is the right time
to go into it or not,
because we wanna get to the eidetics,
but you're speaking about this genius,
is not only from within but it's from without.
In that we are in a quantum field
and if we are in this receptive place and state of mind
that you speak of,
we're actually being fed information constantly,
it's not just what we're, we personally possess
from our own experience,
and that seems to be tossed out of the equation as well,
there's no way to access it under these conditions.
Excellent, if all we're doing is
teaching to the conscious mind,
you're right, so much of this vast, non-conscious ability
which remains really marginalized
and really off line for most of us,
like, intuition, creativity,
oh, she's too creative,
no she doesn't follow the rules,
she's too creative.
And so we end up forcing our creativity
into this long black bag we drag behind us,
and this is what we call our shadow script.
Now, it's gotta come out in really bizarre ways, you see,
because our darker side needs to express itself.
And how is it coming out,
how do we compensate as a species
for this oppression?
Well, what happens is, you know,
creativity has to find a way.
So if you look at the state of our society,
you see it as a natural progression.
How many kids are dropping out of school?
How many kids don't do well,
don't do the work?
Asian kids coming into the United States,
realize that they get good grades
because they work really hard at it.
Kids in the United States look at the Asian kids
and they say well they do well 'cause they're smart.
They don't get that it's the work, you know,
work building the dendrites of the brain
and work of engaging the mind,
work of overcoming the failures
of early learning trials to get to
the success that is possible for them.
And so we end up giving up way too easily
and adult learners are classics of this.
We try something three times,
if we don't get it,
I'm never gonna be able to do that.
(laughing)
But that's really the minefield,
that's the idea,
of adult learning and human development.
Well, when we come back to this idea
the word genius, the origin of the word genius,
is from the Greek.
And the term represented an angelic presence
that's born into your life with you,
that's there to guide and assist you.
In the cultures of the Middle East
they had the concept of the genie.
Right.
The jinn, J-I-N-N,
that's the same origin,
it's the same, there is a higher power
that's able to guide us.
But if we exclude that from the equation
of teaching and learning,
kids never get an opportunity to contact that
and allow it to express itself.
Really, we are left degeniused.
It's as if that genius capacity
it's not just from within, it is from without,
there's an interaction.
We feed forward into the world,
we receive feedback that informs us
and so we become more skilled.
We do need to build skill sets
that assist us in succeeding in the world.
But some of us,
in failing to pass a test,
we just decide, I'm no good at math.
I'm no good at art, whatever it might be.
I'm great at my career but I'm lousy in relationships.
I'm great in relationships but I'm lousy in my career.
At some point we switched off and so
a model that I created called Natural Brilliance,
re-initializes that natural genius level,
creative ability,
and allows you to learn whatever it is
you need to learn.
Does this stuff deal with the eidetics?
No.
They're two separate things,
which way do you want to go?
They're both intriguing.
You choose.
You need a couple more shows.
We sure do.
Well, tell me, which one,
we have some, a little bit of time left here,
which way would you like to go?
Well, let me just say,
in terms of this natural brilliance,
because we're really on this topic of
teaching and learning.
If you realize, there are areas of your life
where you succeed.
You've always succeeded in it,
you've always done well in it,
and there's areas of your life where no matter what you do,
you keep getting the same failures over and over again.
Try something new and still, you know,
get the same result three months later,
you're at the same place you were before.
And that's okay, it's what we call a stuck state.
There's an oscillation going on.
You wanna do well, you can't do well.
You wanna try it, you don't wanna try it.
Because you're afraid you're gonna fail.
And as long as that oscillation is going on,
you stay stuck.
Think of the oscillation as being your comfort zone.
From here to here there is a stop sign
on each end.
As a result of our conditioning in the world
the stop sign got put in place
that said don't go past here.
If you do, you're in trouble.
And so we end up living within a narrow margin.
Some people who are contemplating suicide,
believe there are only two choices in life.
It's like, end it now, with a blast of pain,
or live in this pain forever.
We don't see, you know,
literally billions of other choices,
our world has narrowed to this little space.
Well, let's pull the stop signs out and say,
well, hang on just a moment.
What is true about your life?
What are the real gifts and resources that you have?
And this is where the eidetics come in, you see.
Because once we tap into the truth about
who you are, the magnificence about who you are,
you see you have millions of choices
that you could engage in.
And so what I've seen is,
people who have been a failure in school
be able to achieve great success
and by using the non-conscious mind,
engaging those further resources,
really discovering how much is really possible for them.
So they give up those ideas of what they can
or cannot do,
they break the trance.
They stop the oscillation.
They reinitialize that genius capacity
for learning that we're born into the world.
Let's take a concrete example,
just one example of how eidetics works
to change somebody's experience around.
Well, let me start with
the concept of learning.
Let's just take the idea of learning
and think back,
just allow an image to come into your mind,
if you would,
sit back, relax, and allow any image
to come from your childhood
when you learned something,
and you learned it well,
you learned it easily,
and you really enjoyed learning it.
And it may or may not be in school,
I mean, often times, those kinds of learning experiences
come from something outside of school.
And just remember what that felt like.
What it looked like.
Who you were at the time.
And actually go into that you
that you were at that age.
And remembering how you felt at the time,
and what you believed to be true about yourself
as a learner in this area of life, right?
Now remember a time where you failed to learn something.
And remember what that felt like.
And remember who was involved with it
and what that looked like
and when you are in your body having that experience
notice where in your body you feel it.
The meaning that you assign to it.
See and you carried that with you,
and if you continue to replay that image of failure
you can continue to experience that image
or that feeling and that meaning about
who you are,
now try this, this is where the eidetics comes in.
Go into that feeling of you as someone who
learned easily in that subject,
now holding this feeling,
remember the subject area in which you didn't learn well.
And how does that image change for you?
Greatly.
Describe, what are some of the changes
that occur?
Well, in the first image,
was learning, because I had, I was essentially blind,
2400 vision and no one knew it,
I couldn't see anything 'till about, age of 11.
So all of my work was done within a foot of my face.
So for me to be able to use art
to draw the anatomy,
I loved physiology, anatomy, and science courses,
to be able to draw it helped me learn
and made me very happy.
Because I could see something,
because I couldn't see the chalkboard.
Wonderful, so you know what those
happy feelings are like.
Yes, it's from the chest,
it flows up into the head and behind the eyes
and it floats around and it feels wonderful and expansive.
So there's an image and there's a feeling,
so it's the image, the soma,
the feeling, but then there's also a meaning
that's attached to that.
What meaning did that have for you?
I don't know,
I don't know exactly how to describe,
to ascribe a meaning to it,
other than that for me,
I understood very clearly,
that creativity was my path to learning.
Excellent.
Excellent, that's the meaning.
Yeah, it always was.
Creativity was my path to learning.
The opposite of it was,
now I had some glasses and I'm sitting in algebra
in seventh grade,
and it's very dry,
and I cannot understand why this is important
to my life.
It has no relevance,
and so I check out and I start drawing.
I'm doodling and drawing
all through the classes
so I failed the class,
well I got a D minus,
'cause he said I was so terrible
he never wanted to see me in his class again.
Oh nice.
That was a way, because I didn't do the work,
because I didn't get, I didn't get it.
It wasn't relevant.
Yet.
Knowing I have a good mind for that sort of thing,
now taking them and overlaying that feeling of
the artwork and the gathering of knowledge
through creativity,
and now trying to listen to the teacher,
teaching the algebra from that lens,
it felt like it was logical and possible
to understand algebra from the first day,
because maybe I could hear it in a different way.
And when you think about it,
there's so many ways that could play out.
For example, did you do better in geometry
than algebra?
Yeah, definitely.
You see, and geometry has, you know,
it's a different part of the brain
that you start engaging.
So you could say well I'm dumb at math
or you can say well, I didn't do well in that class,
I'm not dumb at math.
You see, so you begin to bring that creativity
and that image and that feeling--
And oddly as an adult,
because I was always embarrassed
because I never understood algebra.
I never did.
I shunned it.
My son, taking algebra, I said honey,
why don't you teach me algebra?
When he was at that place in his younger years,
and so as he taught me because he was,
he went to the Waldorf schools,
it was all made fun and everything,
they had much more creativity at the base of it,
he was teaching me in the way he had learned algebra,
and all of a sudden, within two seconds,
I understood algebra.
Yay!
That's all there was to it,
it was the way in which it was introduced.
And here's such a beautiful opportunity,
you know, when we realize that we can recover a part
of ourselves that had been lost,
as a result of an image that we continue
to replay about math and algebra and all that,
and we can begin to focus on those images
and those feelings that really store
the true resource that we are,
the true capacity that we have.
That expands, then it can generalize.
It can distort and generalize in positive ways
throughout our lives.
Absolutely.
Well, I'll give you a,
let's talk about eidetics for just a minute.
This is an example of the use of eidetics,
in teaching and learning,
and there are a lot of other actual specific images
that can be helpful,
but let me just, for those who are watching
to understand a bit about Dr. Ahsen's work--
How do you spell his name
so people can look him up online?
It's A-H-S-E-N, Ahsen.
Okay, alright.
And his first name is Akhter,
A-K-H-T-E-R.
Okay, Akhter Ahsen.
Dr. Akhter.
Dr. Akhter Ahsen.
Brilliant, brilliant thinker,
if you get a chance to study with him
he's fabulous.
You should get him on your show.
Okay.
Well, I'm circling it right now.
So, let me just give you something
from what he calls the eidetics parents test,
which is quite an interesting image.
Imagine yourself as a child,
seven, eight, or nine years old,
in the home of your parents where you grew up,
and see your parents standing in front of you.
If you need to close your eyes to do this that's great,
because it takes out extraneous visual information,
but as you look at this image,
see your parents standing there in front of you,
which of your parents is on the left?
And which is on the right?
So just notice that, for you.
Now, switch their positions.
And notice what happens to the image.
So in your case, what happened?
My mother was on the left
in the initial one.
And then my father was more of a shadow on the right
and when they switched positions,
and my father was on the left,
then he was, it was a full image of light and brilliance
of both of them.
A vividness on the left,
but in both cases, no vividness on the right.
When they switched.
Very interesting, okay, so there's this principle
that Dr. Ahsen points out,
it's called the unvividness.
And it has a significant role to play
in our imagery.
It's not that I, I have trouble visualizing,
you know a lot of people do that to themselves,
that's not it, I mean obviously you can see your parents
in front of you,
and when you make that switch,
you see there is a natural postion
that you have them in,
and that image has a reality and a life to it.
And we can actually analyze that image
relative to who, in your childhood,
had the prominent position,
and when you switch them, all of a sudden, yeah,
your father could take on a more clear,
more prominent position.
So if we, let's try another one,
it's just quite interesting.
The idea of,
smelling the air in the house.
Imagine your parents smelling the air in the house,
it might be a sniffing, (sniffing the air)
or it might be a (deep inhale) long breath in.
Look at your parents,
your father smelling the air
and your mother smelling the air
and what do you notice?
Mom's sniffing,
Dad's taking a deeper breath in.
Okay, what this image,
this eidetic is,
has to do with the general atmosphere
within the home life.
Like, the family situation, the atmosphere,
if your mother is (light sniffing)
there's something wrong here,
you know, she's trying to find it,
something is going on.
That would be appropriate,
my dad was much more relaxed.
Yeah, exactly, the father taking a deep breath in
shows more relaxed.
Now, a child having that eidetic,
having that image,
understands, and it's an intuitive,
it's a body sensation,
there's a meaning to that
that we carry with us,
and this is a result of the child interacting
with the parent's histories.
With who the parents are.
It's not you coming from the primordial realmless realm
of pure imagination where anything is possible,
it's like these become fixed images
and understandings about how your world works.
And ends up informing you,
for years to come.
So the real invitation is to come to an awareness
of the images that we have.
To be able to contact that realm
where the pure imagination is,
in a quiet place within you,
allow the image to emerge,
that you can then follow.
Allow yourself to follow it,
it will instruct you in all that you need
to live the life of fullness
that's possible for you in this life.
So much more organic,
so much more beautiful and flowing
and responsive.
Well, everybody can get to your website
by clicking on the link below your face right now,
and we will, I will suggest to everybody
that you watch this one a couple of times,
because there's an awful lot of information embedded here.
And thank you so much for your time.
It's a pleasure and thanks so much for the invite.
Please check out a copy of Paul's book,
Genius Mind, by clicking on the Amazon link below.
You can also see his lecture and workshop schedule
by visiting his site.
For those of you who want to delve even deeper
into your own internal mind's dialogue,
you might also enjoy our interviews
with Robert Tennis and Stevenson Byron Katie,
until next time,
thanks for watching.
(peaceful music)